.Dd January 12, 2023
.Dt FSX 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm fsx
.Nd File System eXerciser
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl nBOWRUh
.Op Fl b Ar OPNUM
.Op Fl c Ar P
.Op Fl i Ar P
.Op Fl l Ar FLEN
.Op Fl m Ar FROM:TO
.Op Fl o Ar OPLEN
.Op Fl r Ar READBDY
.Op Fl t Ar TRUNCBDY
.Op Fl w Ar WRITEBDY
.Op Fl N Ar NUMOPS
.Op Fl P Ar DIRPATH
.Op Fl S Ar SEED
.Op Ar FILENAME
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
utility tests file system I/O routines for correctness, with random input.
It generates a pseudorandom sequence of file modifications and applies them
to a file on the file system under test.
On every read, it verifies the expected data.
It's highly configurable, and the test sequence is 100% reproducible according
to a seed value.
If a failure is detected,
.Nm
will log the most recent operations and write the expected file contents to
.Ar FILENAME.fsxgood .
.Pp
The options are as follows:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl b Ar OPNUM
Begin real I/O at operation number
.Ar OPNUM .
Previous operations will be simulated, and their cumulative effect written
to the file just before real I/O starts.
.It Fl c Ar P
After each operation, randomly close and reopen the file with a probability of
1 in
.Ar P .
.It Fl i Ar P
After each operation, randomly call
.Fn msync _ _ MS_INVALIDATE
with a probability of
1 in
.Ar P .
.It Fl l Ar FLEN
Use
.Ar FLEN
as the maximum size for the file under test.
.It Fl m Ar FROM:TO
Monitor operations within the byte range
.Ar [FROM,TO).
All operations in this range will be logged at the
.Dv LOG_WARN
log level.
.It Fl n
Disable verifications of file size.
.It Fl o Ar OPLEN
Generate read and write operations of between 0 and
.Ar OPLEN
bytes in size, with uniform distribution.
.It Fl r Ar READBDY
Align reads to multiples of
.Ar READBDY
bytes.
.It Fl t Ar TRUNCBDY
Align truncations to multiples of
.Ar TRUNCBDY
bytes.
.It Fl w Ar WRITEBDY
Align writes to multiples of
.Ar WRITEBDY
bytes.
.It Fl B
Block mode.
Never change the file's size.
This option is useful for testing block devices rather than file systems.
When using block mode,
.Nm
will never change the file's size, even at startup.
The user must ensure that the file under test has the desired size before
starting
.Nm .
.It Fl N Ar NUMOPS
Terminate after processing
.Ar NUMOPS
operations.
If this option is not specified,
.Nm
will run until interrupted or a failure is detected.
.It Fl O
Instead of generating read and write operations of between 0 and
.Ar OPLEN
bytes, always use exactly
.Ar OPLEN .
.It Fl P Ar DIRPATH
On failure, save artifacts to the directory named by
.Ar DIRPATH .
.It Fl S Ar SEED
Seed the random number generator with this value.
By default,
.Nm
will select a seed pseudorandomly, and log it to
.Em stderr .
.It Fl W
Disable the use of
.Fn mmap
for writing.
.It Fl R
Disable the use of
.Fn mmap
for reading.
.It Fl U
Disable the use of
.Fn msync
after writing with
.Fn mmap .
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ev RUST_LOG
Controls the verbosity level of messages logged to
.Em stderr .
Valid values are
.Dv trace ,
.Dv debug ,
.Dv info ,
.Dv warn ,
and
.Dv error .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Sh HISTORY
The first version of
.Nm
was written in C at Apple Computer, beginning in 1998,
by
.An Avadis Tevanian Jr .
It was imported into
.Fx 5.0
by
.An Jordan Hubbard Aq Mt jkh@FreeBSD.org ,
but only as a development tool.
It was never installed as part of any release.
It's had occasional enhancements since then.
.Pp
.Nm
was independently imported into Linux in 2001 by user
.An robbiew ,
and has occasionally merged in features from the
.Fx
version.
.Pp
A tool by the same name was included in DEC Unix 4.0, but I don't think it
shared any code.
.Pp
This version is a full rewrite in Rust, by
.An Alan Somers Aq Mt asomers@FreeBSD.org .
